# Source Code Version Control Tools

## Introduction
* **Version Control** is vital in software development for a multitide of reasons.  The most important use of version control is as the name describes: "*version control*," means that commiting changes to your code in your desired version control system, you are then able to "*control which version*" of your code you wish to easily view or make changes to.  This eliminates the stress of accidentally losing important code, or having your code work during one version then break it at a later version.
* The use of **Version Control** is even more beneficial when collaborating in teams on a project.  Version control allows and provides a detailed history of changes made to files so you can see who made changes to a file, when they were made, and why they were made.  This is even more beneficial when the user adds commit messages to document their changes as they made and upload them.  Version control also allows for other vital documents, such as a README and even the file you are currently reading to exist, providing even more information about the project at hand.  All of the documentation previously mentioned is invaluable in software development and streamlines the development process.
* Also, through the use of a code editor such as **Visual Studio Code**, anyone with access to the repository where these files exist can easily copy all of the necessary files for software development directly from the repository onto their machine.  From there they can edit said files, then commit the changes they make directly back into the repository.  This provides quite literally the easiest and most efficient way for all team members to access all of the files needed, without having to directly ask for one member to send files to another, or any other nightmare scenario you could come up with.
## Version Control System Used
* The Version Control System (VCS) I used for this project is **GitHub**.  The main reason I chose GitHub over other Version Control Systems, such as GitLab, is that when preparing for the original DevContainer assignment, I was researching this task and almost every video or article I saw was using GitHub.  Also, while I had never used a VCS in the past, it was the only system that I was even remotely familiar with, and this was the VCS that Professor Munday elected to use as well.
* I wanted to do a little more research before committing to a VCS though, and this is when I discovered **GitHub actions**.  This is a feature within GitHub that allows you to almost instantly creat, build, test, and deploy a continuous integration and continuous delivery (CI/CD) pipeline for your projects.  Since this was one of the main goals of this project, I felt that this was going to be a major help in the production process of this project.  Besides this major feature, GitHub also boasts other very useful features such as code reveiw tools, issue tracking, branching, merging, pull requests, etc., which all aid in the devlopment process.  I also felt like since GitHub was the most popular VCS, it would be more likely that another classmate or the professor would be able to help me in the event that I had an issue.  Finally, since I felt that GitHub had the cleanest and most familiar feeling user interface, I elected to use GitHub as my Version Control System.
* If interested in getting started with GitHub after reading the previous section, feel free to sign up for free at their website [here](https://github.com/).
* Once setting this up, if the user wish to begin testing making and commiting changes to this repository through VSCode, feel free to download VSCode from their website [here](https://code.visualstudio.com/download).
## Repository Setup
#### Repository Structure
* At the time of writing, my GitHub repository has three files in the **main** branch: .github, default_flutter_app, and project_documentation (this will be created in the near future).  Inside .github are various files associated with GitHub and version control.  Inside default_flutter_app is where the default button clicker and counter flutter app created for testing the DevContainer, Docker, etc. as well as my actual DevContainer and Dockerfiles are located.  While it is not proper style to include my DevContainer and Dockerfile directly in the app files, I have yet to get these two to work correctly when they are in a .devcontainer folder like they should be.  This will be fixed, and this should be another folder within the main branch.  The project_documentation folder contains all of, you guessed it, my project documentation.  This includes files such as my README as well as the file you are currently reading.
* My branching strategy is to create a new branch for every new feature I plan to implement or for every bug I plan to fix.  This way any changes made for a specific feature/bug will be separate from the main branch to avoid changing code that I know already works.  Once I am sure that a new feature works correctly, only then will I merge this branch with the main branch to update the main branch's code.
#### Implementation With DevContainer and CI/CD Pipeline
* By creating a DevContainer and inserting it within a project directory in a VCS, any other collaborators who need to work on the project can download and use the DevContainer to have their coding environment setup exactly how the lead on the project wishes the coding environment to be setup.  This eliminates the "*It works on my machine*" issue in software development as each individual who downloads the project files and DevContainer from the VCS repository will have their coding environments opened with the exact same settings setup.
* Many of the most popular VCS have some sort of tools to aid in the creation of a **Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD)** pipeline. For example, GitHub has GitHub Actions and GitLab has GitLab CI. This does as the name describes; it automates the process of testing and deploying code changes within your repository.  By utilizing these tools, in my case GitHub Actions, a CI/CD pipeline is created using a YAML file that specifies the steps to build, test, and deploy your project, and in my case, my flutter application.
#### Standard Naming Convention Adopted
* The commit message format that I have adopted is to write a concise topic sentence of what was done, then provide a bit more detail after.  This way, I can easily read through the commit messages to find what I am looking for by looking at the topic sentence, then once I have found the correct commit, I can then read a bit more of what was done at that stage.
* While I would say that I have not adopted a "*standard*" naming convention for branches, I like to follow a simple format of writing what conveys exactly what is being developed within this branch, while also keeping this as short as possible.
## Common Commands and Usage
```
git clone https://github.com/CodyGrandt/pipeline_project
```
* This command clones the specified repository, allowing you to save all of the files within the repository onto your machine where you can then begin to work on said project.  The exact command listed above is what I would type into the VSCode terminal in order to clone my pipeline_project repository onto my local machine.
```
git commit -m "insert desired commit message here"
```
* This command commits all changes made to the files you cloned onto your machine back into the repository.  For example, if I had my files cloned over, then added a README file, wrote some text inside of this file, then wished for this README to be inserted into my repository, then I may type a command like so into the VSCode terminal: `git commit -m "created and wrote README"`
```
git branch branch_name
```
* This command creates a new branch within your repository to allow you to begin working on a new feature for your project, without having it interfere with your already completed and working code.  The name given to the branch should be concise and represents the feature you intend on creating and implementing.  Once created, you will then need to use the following command to actually enter that branch: `git checkout branch_feature_name`.  For example, if I wished to create a new branch for multiplayer, the commands entered into the VSCode terminal look like so: `git branch multiplayer` and then `git checkout multiplayer`.
```
git merge branch_name
```
* This command merges the branch entered with the current branch.  For example, if I was in the main branch and I wished to merge my new multiplayer feature (which I had already tested to confirm that it worked), then I would type the following command into the VSCode terminal: `git merge multiplayer`
```
git revert <commit-hash>
```
* This command allows you to revert to a previous version of your repository before recent commits take place, hints the name and most important aspect of Version Control.  To do so, you must obtain the unique code assigned to each commit, then enter this command into the VSCode terminal in place of the `<commit-hash>` place holder written above.
## Collaboration Features
* Version Control is the single most beneficial tool to collaboration among team members.  By having a shared repository where all of the necessary project files are located and where team members can push their changes back into this repository, the software development process is streamlined by eliminating the need to ask other team members from files as they are all located within the repository.
* Each team member can create their own branch to work on their specific task without interfering with the main code.  Once this feature is completed, it can either be committed back into the main branch of the repository, or a **pull request** can be made.
* **A pull request** proposes changes to the main code of the project, instead of automatically committing these changes.  Team members can then *review the code* and the changes made and provide feedback before this change is made to the main code of the project.
* **Code Review** is a vital part of collaborating in the software development process.  First off, this promotes discussions within team members, and allows team members to become familiar with your section of the project.  This maintains a streamlined development process as team members stay on the same page about the goal of the project.  Also, since everyone makes mistakes, it is invaluable to have others to bounce your code off of, having them look for bugs and also ensuring that your code is up to standard in quality.  This should also be carried out once a pull request is made for a specific feature, so that the other team members can confirm that this feature should be merged with the main source code.
* Version Control is also great in aiding teams in the event of **conflict resolution** occurring.  This is when two team members make changes to the same code.  By utilizng Version Control tools such as reverting to previous commit stages, this is great for resolving conflicts that arise in the devlopment process.
## Challenges and Solutions
* The main issue I encountered when trying to use the Version Control system was that VSCode has an interface for committing changes to the repository.  For some reason, when I first was trying to commit my changes into my repository through this interface, it never worked and just loaded forever.  I resolved this issue by electing to use the git commands in the VSCode terminal instead, which looks like so:
```
git commit -m "message"
```
* Although at first I thought that the command had to contain `"message"`. I was unaware that this was just a message associated with the commit that could be changed to anything the user desired, so the first commits I made all contained a message of only "*message"".
## Conclusion
* Version Control is an invaluable tool in the software development process.  It allows all team members to collaborate seemlessly on the project at hand by providing all of the necessary files in an easy to access repository that can be cloned directly onto any team members machine and opened in VSCode.  Each team member can work in their own branch, which eliminates interference with both other team members as well as the main source code.  These team members can then commit their changes into the main source code or create a pull request, which then requires the other team members to view the changes wishing to be made.  This allows others to approve your code before merging it with the source code.  If errors do occur, this is no issue as each commit version is saved, therefore the VCS allows the team to easily revert to an older commit stage which is confirmed to be working.  This eliminates the threat of losing or breaking code.  Finally, Version Control Systems such as GitHub provide tools to seamlessly integrate Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment pipelines into the workflow, which automatically test, build, and deploy the current project after changes are made.
